RFC 1025 TOTP protected local device (#11950)
Scille/parsec-cloud: docs/rfcs/1025-totp-protected-local-device.md

first using login/password, and only then a second one involving the TOTP.

However this is not something we can do with Parsec: we want to protect the device keys
file with the TOTP, however it is the device signing key (which is part of the device
keys file) that is used to authenticate to the Parsec server.

So instead we must first to the TOTP check, and have its result used as a secret
required to decrypt the device keys file.

### 2.3 - Different TOTP usages

TOTP code can be obtained from different sources, typically:

- TOTP application (e.g. Google Authenticator)
- Email
- SMS

This RFC consider the TOTP code are only going to be obtained from a TOTP application.

However later development on the server side can be done to add additional ways.
This would typically require a new anonymous API command (`totp_info` ?) so that
the client.

### 2.4 - How is used the secret obtained from the TOTP challenge ?

Once the TOTP challenge succeeded, the Parsec server send to the client a secret.
This secret has then to be used in conjuction with the secret obtained from the primary
protection (i.e. OS keyring) in order to decrypt the device keys file.

> This is done by considering both secret as separate keys and hence doing two decryption operations:

Author: :+1:

- Cleartext is first encrypted using the secret key obtained from the primary protection.
- Then it is again encrypted using the secret key obtained from the TOTP challenge, hence
  obtaining the final ciphertext.

Put it another way, the local device decryption is done this way:

```rust
let key_from_totp_challenge: SecretKey = ...
let key_from_primary_protection: SecretKey = ...
let cleartext = key_from_totp_challenge.decrypt(
    key_from_primary_protection.decrypt(ciphertext)

> );

Author: An important point here is to be able to validate both protection apart from each other, this useful so that we can inform the end-user of the issue:
- his TOTP code was invalid
- his password was invalid
- an unexpected error occured: the secret obtain from the server (with the TOTP challenge) couldn't be used for decryption

On the other hand, if the ciphertext is encrypted by a single key that itself is derived from multiple secrets, we cannot know which secret was invalid if the decryption fails.

> Would allow to effectively use multiple auth system with threshold

YAGNI, this add plenty of complexity and I don't see a real usecase for it now.
The need here is to prevent the client from decrypting the ciphertext without first achieving a challenge with the server.
Hence if we want to have multiple MFA systems that have to be used in conjunction (for instance the user has to provide a TOTP code provided by email, then another one from SMS), then it is something that is implemented has additional APIs exposed by the server, with the final API returning the secret to be used for decryption. So even in this case the secret is still a simple decryption key.

>
> We choose against it since having two separate encryption operations means we can know
> which operation has failed (typically useful to prompt the user his password is invalid).

## 3 - Protocol

### 3.1 - Setup a TOTP

Authenticated API:

```json5
[
    {
        "major_versions": [
            5
        ],
        "cmd": "totp_upload_opaque_key",
        "req": {
            "fields": []
        },
        "reps": [
            {
                "status": "ok",
                "fields": [
                    // Note the opaque key is not returned here, and hence `totp_fetch_opaque_key`
                    // must be called to get it.
                    // This is to ensure the opaque key is not used before the end-user has
                    // sucessfully configured his authenticator app with the TOTP secret.
                    {
                        "name": "opaque_key_id",
                        "type": "UUID"
                    },
                    {
                        // TOTP secret to configure in the user's authenticator app.

>                         // Make sure you do that

Author: removed

                        {
                            "name": "opaque_key_id",
                            "type": "UUID"
                        }
                    ]
                }
            ]
        }
    ]
}
```

## 5 - Libparsec API

### 5.1 - New TOTP API

Upload operation is exposed to the GUI through the libparsec API.

```rust
enum TotpUploadOpaqueKeyError {
    Offline,
}
async fn client_totp_upload_opaque_key() -> Result<UUID, TotpUploadOpaqueKeyError>
```

> [!TODO]
>
> Should we expose `totp_fetch_opaque_key()` ?
> This could be useful to have the GUI making sure the TOTP is correctly configured
> before trying to save the device.
> The drawback being the GUI has to handle opaque key which is rather low-level...

### 5.2 - Changes in `list_available_devices()`

Listing available device should provide information about the need for MFA:

```rust
pub enum AvailableDeviceType {
    Keyring,
    Password,
    // ...
}

pub struct AvailableDeviceTOTPConfig {
    label: String,
    opaque_key_id: UUID,
}

pub struct AvailableDevice {
    pub key_file_path: PathBuf,
    // ...
    pub ty: AvailableDeviceType,
    pub totp: Option<AvailableDeviceTOTPConfig>,
}
```

> ### 5.3 - Changes in `Device(Save|Access)Strategy`

Author: It would simplify the structure definition, but at the cost of additional complexity in it usage since all the functions taking a `Device(Save|Access)Strategy` would need to be modified to take an additional parameter (compared to the current approach where only the top caller and lower platform_device_loader function has to deal with the TOTP config)

On top of that, the TOTP config *is* related to the device acces/save strategy, so it makes sens to have it in this structure.
I guess we could modify the `Device(Save|Access)Strategy` to make it a structure that would have two fields `primary` (i.e. the enum) and `totp` (the totp config). But again I fear this would cause too much changes compared to just duplicating code in each variant type (however this approach can be tested during implementation to see if it is worth it :+1: )

<!-- Parsec Cloud (https://parsec.cloud) Copyright (c) BUSL-1.1 2016-present Scille SAS -->

# TOTP for local device protection

## 1 - Goals

This RFC introduce the use of [Multi-Factor Authentication](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multi-factor_authentication)
(MFA) in the form of [Time-based One-Time Password](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time-based_one-time_password)(TOTP)
as an additional layer of protection on the local device.

Basically:

1. Alice starts her Parsec client
2. Alice selects the device she wants to use
3. The Parsec client then prompts Alice to enter a TOTP code.
   The TOTP code is then is transmitted to the server.
4. The server checks the TOTP code and returns a second decryption key.
5. The Parsec client prompts Alice to unlock the device according to its main

>    protection (i.e. password). By doing this the client obtain a first decryption key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   protection (e.g. password). By doing this the client obtain the _primary_ decryption key.
```

6. The Parsec client use both first and second decryption keys to decrypt the
   device keys file.

## 2 - Overview

### 2.1 Where TOTP is to be used

Currently a local device can be protected by multiple solutions, for instance:

- Password
- OS keyring
- PKI (i.e. smartcard)
- OpenBao (i.e. SSO-based authentication)

> Most of those solution are local-only, which is both a blessing and a curse:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Most of those solutions are local-only, which is both a blessing and a curse:
```

- pro: Offline login is possible
- con: Offline attack is possible (typically when the user's machine gets stolen)

The use of a TOTP aims at involving the Parsec server in the login operation,
this way no secret can be obtained from the stolen machine (unless, of course,
the attacker also has access to the user's TOTP secret).

This is not a one-size-fits-all solution since its removes the possibility to
login while offline.

However since the TOTP server communication is only required during login (i.e. to
obtain the device keys file's decryption key), offline operation are still
possible after this step.
In a nutshell, with TOTP Parsec can still be used fine in a poor connection
configuration (e.g. traveling in a train), but cannot be used when no connection
is possible for extended periods of time (e.g. in a submarine ^^).

### 2.2 - Differences with traditional TOTP-based authentication

> Typical TOTP-based authentication goes a as follow:

Author: :+1: done.

This secret has then to be used in conjuction with the secret obtained from the primary
protection (i.e. OS keyring) in order to decrypt the device keys file.

This is done by considering both secrets as separate keys and hence doing two decryption operations:

- Cleartext is first encrypted using the secret key obtained from the primary protection.
- Then it is again encrypted using the secret key obtained from the TOTP challenge, hence
  obtaining the final ciphertext.

Put it another way, the local device decryption is done this way:

```rust
let key_from_totp_challenge: SecretKey = ...
let key_from_primary_protection: SecretKey = ...
let cleartext = key_from_totp_challenge.decrypt(
    key_from_primary_protection.decrypt(ciphertext)
);
let device = LocalDevice::load(cleartext);
```

> [!NOTE]
> An alternative solution would be to derive the ciphertext decryption key from both secrets
> (i.e. `KeyDerivation::from(<key_from_primary_protection>).derive_secret_key_from_uuid(<secret_from_totp_challenge>).decrypt(<ciphertext>)`).
>
> We choose against it since having two separate encryption operations means we can know

> > which operation has failed (typically useful to prompt the user his password is invalid).

Author: The user must first pass the TOTP challenge, and only then the decryption is done (since the opaque key obtained from the TOTP is provided in the `DeviceAccessStrategy`)

From a GUI point of view I guess we want to have a first dialogue with the TOTP challenge, and only then a second dialogue with the password. This way the GUI remembers the opaque key from the TOTP challenge and if the password is invalid the user only has to retry entering another password wtithout having to do the TOTP challenge all over again

@max do you agree ?

### 2.5 - Per user TOTP config

Since TOTP is used here to protect a local device, the simpler approach would be to
have a different TOTP configuration for each device.
However this means the end user would have to store in his authenticator app one
TOTP secret per device, which is cumbersome and an error prone (the label for a
TOTP secret is supposed to be something short, here it would end up being something
like `Parsec - <organization_id> - <human_handle_email> - <device_label>`).

> So instead the TOTP should be configured on a per-user base:

Reviewer 3: `Per user` or `per user per organization` or `per user per server` or `per computer`? Can we have only one entry "Parsec" on the app for all devices, whatever the org, the server, and web or laptop or desktop?

Whenever the TOTP challenge in `totp_create_opaque_key` or `totp_fetch_opaque_key` is
successful, then `totp_setup_get_secret` always returns `already_setup` (i.e. the
client can no longer obtain the TOTP secret since he is supposed to have it stored
in his authenticator app).

> [!NOTE]
> In a traditional application, TOTP can be disabled and later re-enabled. In
> which case a new TOTP secret is provided to the user.
>
> Here this is not possible: once the TOTP configured we cannot know if some
> local device is protected with it.
> So the TOTP configuration is setup once, and stays the same even if the user
> remove TOTP protection from all his device, then later on choose to re-add
> it.
> This is a bit error prone for the end user (since he may assume the secret in
> his authenticator app can be removed once he has disabled TOTP protection in
> all his devices), however this is no big deal:
>
> - The worst case is the end user can no longer protect his device with TOTP,
>   he is not locked out of it.
> - The outcome is similar to what would occur if the end user had lose his
>   authenticator app: in both case the server admin has to intervene to reset

> >   the TOTP setup.

Reviewer: This is covered in the list of changes below
```
- CLI server: reset TOTP setup for a given user
```

I don't quite understand if this is impossible for some reason (there is no way for the user to reset TOTP themselves with the current design), or if it's just a workaround for the moment (contact the server admin to reset it).

}
```

### 5.4 - Changes in `Device(Save|Access)Strategy`

```rust
pub enum DeviceSaveStrategy {
    Keyring {
        totp_opaque_key: Option<SecretKey>,
    },
    Password {
        totp_opaque_key: Option<SecretKey>,
        password: Password,
    },
    // ...
}

pub enum DeviceAccessStrategy {
    Keyring {
        totp_opaque_key: Option<SecretKey>,
        key_file: PathBuf,
    },
    Password {
        totp_opaque_key: Option<SecretKey>,
        key_file: PathBuf,
        password: Password,
    },
    ...
}
```

## 6 - List of changes

- New authenticated API: `totp_setup_get_secret`
- New authenticated API: `totp_create_opaque_key`
- New anonymous API:  `totp_fetch_opaque_key`
- CLI server: reset TOTP setup for a given user
- Introduce a new `totp` field in each device file schema (`DeviceFilePassword`, `DeviceFileKeyring`, etc.)
- Libparsec: new function `client_totp_status`
- Liparsec: new function `client_totp_try_challenge`
- Liparsec: new function `client_totp_create_opaque_key`
- Liparsec: new function `client_totp_fetch_opaque_key`
- GUI: check TOTP status and setup it (using `client_totp_status` and `client_totp_try_challenge`)

> - GUI: add "enable TOTP" option in save device dialogue (using `client_totp_create_opaque_key`)

Reviewer: We should probably use the term "MFA" (or "2FA") instead of "TOTP" in the GUI and user-facing interfaces.
```suggestion
- GUI: add "enable MFA" option in save device dialogue (using `client_totp_create_opaque_key`)
```

configuration (e.g. traveling in a train), but cannot be used when no connection
is possible for extended periods of time (e.g. in a submarine ^^).

### 2.2 - Differences with traditional TOTP-based authentication

Typical TOTP-based authentication goes as follow:

1. Alice provides her login and password to the server
2. The server checks the login and password
3. Alice provides her TOTP code
4. The server checks the TOTP code

The key point here is there is two separate challenge-response occurring:
first using login/password, and only then a second one involving the TOTP.

However this is not something we can do with Parsec: we want to protect the device keys
file with the TOTP, however it is the device signing key (which is part of the device
keys file) that is used to authenticate to the Parsec server.

So instead we must first do the TOTP check, and have its result used as a secret
required to decrypt the device keys file.

This means the TOTP check is sensitive to brute force attack.

> [!NOTE]
> Considering an attacker making one TOTP attempt every 30s (so every
> time the TOTP code changes), he would have a ~65% chance of succeeding the

> > challenge after one year.

Reviewer 2: Upon thinking a bit more about that: chances of getting the right code are one in 10^6. Every 30 secs the code resets so the one attempt per 30 sec chance has the same success rate as a one-attempt-ever attack (not a very involved attack). 
One attacker would have to succeed in a 30 sec window or not at all. They can renew the attack every 30 secs but they would have to start over. So to have 1/2 chances of succeeding, they'll need 5×10^5 attempts in a 30 sec window so 16 666.66 attempts per second. That would be quite noticeable. And they'll need to start over every 30 sec.

I think your numbers consider that the TOTP code doesn't change ^^

> > challenge after one year.

Author: - Since there is one attempt every 30s, each attempt is independent.
- So for each attempt, there is a 1/10⁶ chance of success. Hence a 1 - 1/10⁶ chance of failure.
- In one year there is (365 * 24 * 3600) / 30 = 1051200 attempts
- So the probability to have absolutely no success in one year is (1 - 1/10⁶)¹⁰⁵¹²⁰⁰ so roughly 0.349
- The probability to have at least one success is (1 - <probability of no success>) hence the 0.650 i.e. 65%

                // return `bad_token`.
                "status": "ok"
            },
            {
                "status": "invalid_one_time_password"
            },
            {
                // Authentication token is either invalid, or the TOTP setup
                // has been completed.
                "status": "bad_token"
            }
        ]
    }
]
```

> [!NOTE]
> This at this point `totp_setup_get_secret` can be called to obtain the TOTP secret,
> there is no point in having a protection against brute force attempts here.

### 3.2 - Create a TOTP-protected opaque key to save a local device

Authenticated API:

```json5
[
    {
        "major_versions": [
            5
        ],
        "cmd": "totp_create_opaque_key",
        "req": {
            "fields": []
        },
        "reps": [
            {
                "status": "ok",
                "fields": [
                    {
                        "name": "opaque_key_id",
                        "type": "TOTPOpaqueKeyID"
                    },
                    {
                        // Note the server knows about this key as it is not encrypted!
                        //

>                         // This is because TOPT's goal is to protect against unauthorized

Author: :+1: done

> - Creating an opaque key before doing the TOTP setup is not an issue (though
>   it is unlikely to occur in practice).
> - TOTP challenge must be protected against brute force attack which is
>   non-trivial (typically `totp_fetch_opaque_key` should do throttled on a
>   per opaque key ID basis, but here we would need to do it on a per-user
>   basis...).

### 3.3 - Access the TOTP-protected opaque key to load a local device

Anonymous API:

```json5
[
    {
        "major_versions": [
            5
        ],
        "cmd": "totp_fetch_opaque_key",
        "req": {
            "fields": [
                {
                    "name": "opaque_key_id",
                    "type": "TOTPOpaqueKeyID"
                },
                {
                    // Value obtained from the authenticator app storing the TOTP secret
                    "name": "one_time_password",
                    "type": "String"
                }
            ]
        },
        "reps": [
            {
                "status": "ok",
                "fields": [
                    {
                        // Note the server knows about this key as it is not encrypted!
                        //

>                         // This is because TOPT's goal is to protect against unauthorized

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                        // This is because TOTP's goal is to protect against unauthorized
```

        totp_secret: String,
    }
    AlreadySetup,
}

async fn client_totp_status() -> Result<TOTPStatus, ClientTOTPOperationError>

// Return true if the provided one-time-password has succeeded the server's TOTP challenge
async fn client_totp_try_challenge(one_time_password: String) -> Result<bool, ClientTOTPOperationError>
```

Typically usecase:

1. GUI uses `client_totp_status()` to check if the TOTP is already setup.
2. If not, the GUI displays the TOTP secret to the end-user and ask for a
   one-time-password (that should be obtained from the authenticator app
   once configured with the secret).
3. GUI uses `client_totp_try_challenge()` to validate the one-time-password was
   valid. Under the hood this function send a `totp_fetch_opaque_key` command
   to the server (with a dummy opaque key ID) which tells the server the TOTP
   secret has been correctly used and should no longer be provided to the client.

### 5.2 - Create/fetch TOTP-protected opaque key

```rust
async fn client_totp_create_opaque_key(one_time_password: String) -> Result<(UUID, SecretKey), ClientTOTPOperationError>

enum ClientTOTPFetchOpaqueKeyError {
    Offline,
    NotFound,
}

> async fn client_totp_fetch_opaque_key(opaque_key_id: UUID, one_time_password: String) -> Result<SecretKey, ClientTOTPFetchOpaqueKeyError>

Reviewer 4: **nitpick:** Render borked by GitHub code review
```suggestion
async fn client_totp_create_opaque_key(one_time_password: String) -> Result<(UUID, SecretKey), ClientTOTPOperationError> {}

enum ClientTOTPFetchOpaqueKeyError {
    Offline,
    NotFound,
}
async fn client_totp_fetch_opaque_key(opaque_key_id: UUID, one_time_password: String) -> Result<SecretKey, ClientTOTPFetchOpaqueKeyError> {}
```
